The UK government is scrambling to secure an emergency deal to protect Britain’s tech and life sciences sectors from major losses after the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank (SVB), as financial markets braced for further volatility after the biggest bank failure since 2008. The prime minister, Rishi Sunak, and the chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, signalled on Sunday that they were exploring a range of options, including an emergency fund that could provide a cash lifeline to support startups, as bidders put their hat in the ring for a potential takeover of the UK subsidiary. Hunt warned that fledgling businesses across the tech and life sciences sector were at “serious risk” if deposits were wiped out by the collapse of SVB UK. The US treasury secretary, Janet Yellen, said on Sunday there would be no bailout for Silicon Valley Bank, but that the Biden administration was working closely with regulators to help depositors caught up in its collapse. UK authorities were understood to be considering a private bailout. Representatives of SVB’s UK subsidiary have reached out to lenders including NatWest, Barclays and Lloyds Banking Group to gauge interest in a potential takeover of the British operations. British clearing bank the Bank of London confirmed on Sunday night it had submitted a rescue bid for the UK arm, alongside a group of private equity firms. “Silicon Valley Bank cannot be allowed to fail given the vital community it serves,” said Bank of London’s chief executive, Anthony Watson. A Middle Eastern investment firm from the United Arab Emirates, Royal, reportedly expressed interest in SVB UK, which has 3,500 customers, ranging from startups to established tech businesses such as the payments firm Wise and cybersecurity firm Darktrace. The Guardian understands that the small business lender OakNorth, which was founded by the Conservative party donor Rishi Khosla and is advised by the former chancellor Phillip Hammond, has also thrown its hat into the ring, as first reported by Sky News. Reports emerged late on Sunday that HSBC was in the running as a potential bidder, though the bank declined to comment. JP Morgan was also approached, but the Guardian understands it had not placed a bid as of Sunday night. The US lender also declined to comment. Hunt said the issue of SVB UK was a “high priority” for the government, which could also turn to the state-owned British Business Bank to explore government-guaranteed loans for the sector, similar to those offered to businesses during the Covid crisis. SVB UK said over the weekend that “barring any intervening event”, regulators at the Bank of England would put the lender into insolvency from Sunday evening. Hunt has been locked in late-night meetings with Sunak and the Bank of England governor, Andrew Bailey, in an attempt to avoid further fallout from the collapse of SVB UK’s American parent company on Friday. Investors and tech founders warned that hundreds of startups could be left insolvent without state intervention. “We will bring forward, very soon, plans to make sure people are able to meet their cashflow requirements and pay their staff, but obviously what we want to do is to find a longer term solution that minimises, or even avoids completely, losses to some of our most promising companies,” Hunt told Sky News. While he insisted there was no systemic risk to the UK financial system, the chancellor said: “There is a serious risk to our technology and life sciences sectors, many of whom bank with this bank that most people won’t have heard of – the Silicon Valley Bank – but it happens to look after the money of some of our most promising and exciting businesses.” The government has asked affected startups to disclose how much cash they had on deposit at SVB UK, as well as how much they tend to spend each month, and whether they had access to any other bank accounts other than the collapsed lender. The startup industry body Codec welcomed the government’s commitment to emergency support, saying it was “an acknowledgment of the scale of the challenge”, while investors indicated that they did not have a preference over the shape of the deal. “I don’t believe the sector is particularly bothered by what a package looks like – either through a British Business Bank scheme or otherwise – and has confidence in policymakers to make the right decisions,” Eileen Burbidge, a partner at the venture capital firm Passion Capital and a former fintech envoy to the Treasury, said. “Affected companies simply want access to their hard-earned capital from either revenue and/or investors which they can access from a bank account in order to continue trading and servicing/supplying the UK economy – like they had on Thursday.” Sunak did not rule out an emergency fund being set up to guarantee deposits. He said on Sunday the suggestion was “speculation” but added when asked about the possibility: “We’re working through it; the Treasury is in touch.” The PM, who is travelling to California for a meeting with US and Australian leaders, is understood to have been in “constant contact with Hunt over SVB UK” throughout the 14-hour journey. American counterparts have also been working around the clock. Yellen said on Sunday she was working closely with banking regulators to protect depositors, but stressed that a major bailout was not being considered. “Let me be clear that during the financial crisis, there were investors and owners of systemic large banks that were bailed out … and the reforms that have been put in place means we are not going to do that again,” Yellen told the CBS News show Face the Nation. “But we are concerned about depositors and are focused on trying to meet their needs.” Any widespread collapse of UK startups would be a blow to Hunt’s and Sunak’s ambitions to turn the UK into the “world’s next Silicon Valley”. The chancellor lauded the prospects of the sector’s growth during a speech in January. The prospect of further fallout spurred the Treasury to hold an emergency meeting with UK tech industry representatives on Saturday evening, as more than 200 tech executives penned an open letter warning the chancellor that they were actively “running numbers to see if we are technically insolvent” as a result of SVB UK’s failure. The letter explained that the tech sector was highly interconnected and that the loss of deposits had the potential to cripple the industry, with many businesses at risk of falling into insolvency overnight. Silicon Valley Bank – which was the 16th largest lender in the US – collapsed and had its assets seized by US regulators on Friday after a tumultuous 48 hours. The lender had been trying to raise emergency funding to plug a near-$2bn (£1.7bn) hole in its finances, after an increase in withdrawals from customers in the tech industry who have seen funding dry up in recent months. The Bank of England subsequently ordered its UK subsidiary into insolvency on Friday night, putting firms at risk of losing almost all their cash. Only £85,000 of clients’ deposits will be protected by the Financial Services Compensation Scheme, or £170,000 for joint accounts, meaning many of SVB UK’s 3,500 customers will be facing major losses without government intervention.
Saudi oil giant Aramco has announced a record profit of $161.1bn (£134bn) for 2022, helped by soaring energy prices and bigger volumes. It represents a 46.5% rise for the state-owned company, compared with last year. It is the latest energy firm to report record profits, after energy prices spiked following Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine in February 2022.America's ExxonMobil made $55.7bn, and Britain's Shell reported $39.9bn. Aramco also declared a dividend of $19.5bn for the October to December quarter of 2022, to be paid in the first quarter of this year. Most of that will go to the Saudi government, which owns nearly 95% of the shares in the company. Brent crude oil, the benchmark oil price, now trades at around $82 a barrel - though prices exceeded $120 a barrel last March, after Russia's invasion, and June. "Aramco rode the wave of high energy prices in 2022," said Robert Mogielnicki of the Arab Gulf States Institute in Washington. "It would have been difficult for Aramco not to perform strongly in 2022." In a statement on Sunday, Aramco said the company results were "underpinned by stronger crude oil prices, higher volumes sold and improved margins for refined products". Aramco's president and CEO Amin Nasser said: "Given that we anticipate oil and gas will remain essential for the foreseeable future, the risks of underinvestment in our industry are real - including contributing to higher energy prices." To address those challenges, he said, the company would not only focus on expanding oil, gas and chemicals production - but also invest in new lower-carbon technologies. Aramco - the world's second-most valuable company only behind America's Apple - is a major emitter of greenhouse gas emissions that contribute to climate change. Responding to Aramco's announcement, Amnesty International's secretary general Agnès Callamard said: "It is shocking for a company to make a profit of more than $161bn in a single year through the sale of fossil fuel - the single largest driver of the climate crisis." She added: "It is all the more shocking because this surplus was amassed during a global cost-of-living crisis and aided by the increase in energy prices resulting from Russia's war of aggression against Ukraine." Saudi Arabia is the largest producer in the oil cartel Opec (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries). The Gulf kingdom has been condemned for a range of human rights abuses: its involvement in the conflict in neighbouring Yemen, the murder in 2018 of journalist Jamal Khashoggi, for jailing dissidents, and for the widespread use of capital punishment. In a separate development on Sunday, Iran said its oil exports had reached their highest level since the re-imposition of US sanctions in 2018. Oil Minister Javad Owji said exports increased by 83 million barrels in 2022 compared with the previous 12 months. In Iran, a new year starts in March. Analysts say the rise is due to greater shipments to Iranian allies China and Venezuela. Tehran's export revenues took a significant hit after then-US President Donald Trump pulled out of a landmark nuclear deal five years ago. The US sanctions, coupled with economic mismanagement and corruption, have meant that the Iranian economy has not had any substantive growth in the past decade. And by some measures, it is still 4-8% smaller than it was back in 2010.
Racing's four-day Cheltenham Festival starts on Tuesday amid anticipation, controversy and uncertainty. About 280,000 spectators are expected at the meeting where the unbeaten Constitution Hill tops the opening-day bill in the Champion Hurdle. Last year's winner Honeysuckle goes instead this time in the Mares' Hurdle in what might be her swansong. Runners face disqualification if jockeys seriously breach contentious new rules on use of the whip. Much of the talk in the build-up has centred on how riders will adapt to the regulations in the heat of top-level competition. There is also unpredictability around the weather with a mixed forecast raising the prospect of soft going and throwing the form book with drier conditions into doubt. On the opening day the focus will be on Nicky Henderson's exciting Constitution Hill, who has won his five previous races by a total of 77 lengths, including last year's opening Supreme Novices' Hurdle. The cheering sound of the crowd as the first contest gets under way has become so iconic that course owners, the Jockey Club, have turned it into a techno dance track called 'Roar Remix' featuring DJ Cuddles. It is the first of 28 races at a meeting which is worth an estimated £274m to the local economy, according to a report by the University of Gloucestershire. The meeting concludes on Friday where Gold Cup runners will include the winners of the Irish Gold Cup, King George VI Chase and Grand National in Galopin Des Champs, Bravemansgame and Noble Yeats. How good is Constitution Hill? Very, very good. The six-year-old has been breathtaking in his five previous runs under jockey Nico de Boinville. Likely to go off the hottest favourite of the week, bookmaker William Hill has even changed the branding on its Cheltenham shops to Constitution Hill.Irish Champion Hurdle winner State Man and stablemate Vauban are next in the betting for the Festival's leading trainer Willie Mullins. Constitution Hill is one of few English-trained favourites in a week which has been dominated by the Irish in recent years. Trainer Henderson, seeking a record-extending ninth win in the Champion Hurdle, is trying to keep a lid on the expectation. "Constitution Hill is doing freakish things, but he's only had five runs in his life and you have to remember it is very early days in his career," he said. What are the new whip rules? Rules introduced last month reduce the number of times the whip is permitted by one, to seven in jumps races and six in flat races. Jockeys face suspension for going above that limit and their horse disqualified if they go four or more over the threshold. Bans are doubled if the offence takes place in Class 1 and 2 races. Some riders have struggled to adapt and believe policing of the changes has been draconian, while Irish jockeys who also compete in Britain have a different set of rules in their homeland. Potential offences are now referred to the Whip Review Committee, rather than dealt with by racecourse stewards on the day. The committee also looks at other matters including the force used, whether it was used from above shoulder height, and the time given for a horse to respond. All bets by punters will stand on the day, with any breaches - and potential disqualifications - not dealt with until the following week. Rachael Blackmore has been clocking up the landmarks, becoming the first woman to ride the Gold Cup winner when triumphant on A Plus Tard 12 months ago. A year earlier, she was the first female to be the week's leading rider before going on to claim another historic triumph on Minella Times in the Grand National. Blackmore is set to be aboard A Plus Tard again in Friday's Gold Cup, while trainer Henry de Bromhead will also saddle 2021 winner Minella Indo. It will be a poignant week for De Bromhead with Thursday's mares' novices hurdle named in honour of his 13-year-old son Jack, who died in a riding accident last year. De Bromhead and Blackmore will hope Honeysuckle, who has won 16 of her 18 races, can claim her third Festival triumph on Tuesday. One jockey who did not expect to be competing again at Cheltenham is 43-year-old Davy Russell, who retired in December but has returned to the saddle to help trainer Gordon Elliott after Jack Kennedy suffered a broken leg. Champion Chase, Wednesday: Last year's winner Energumene runs in the blue-and-white colours of owner Tony Bloom, chairman of Brighton and Hove Albion, while Editeur Du Gite carries the red, white and blue favoured by the Crystal Palace-supporting Preston family. The 2022 Arkle Chase victor Edwardstone is another leading contender. Ryanair Chase, Thursday: Favourite Shishkin was diagnosed with a rare bone condition after he was pulled up in last year's Champion Chase, when a 10-race unbeaten run came to an end, but he bounced back to form with victory at Ascot last month for Henderson. Stayers' Hurdle, Thursday: Flooring Porter and his boisterous band of supporters are seeking a hat-trick after victories in 2021 and 2022. The 2019 winner Paisley Park, who runs for blind owner Andrew Gemmell, looks to regain his title after twice finishing third in the race. Gold Cup, Friday: Along with last year's first two, the third-placed Protektorat is also expected to line up. Ahoy Senor would be the first Scottish-trained winner, while John 'Shark Hanlon' seeks victory with £800 bargain buy Hewick. "It'd be a great story to win it, wouldn't it?" he said.Tuesday's schedule (All times GMT) 13:30 - Sky Bet Supreme Novices' Hurdle, 2m 1/2f 14:10 - Sporting Life Arkle Challenge Trophy Novices' Chase, 2m 14:50 - Ultima Handicap Chase, 3m 1f 15:30 - Unibet Champion Hurdle Challenge Trophy, 2m 1/2f 16:10 - Close Brothers Mares' Hurdle, 2m 4f 16:50 - Boodles Juvenile Handicap Hurdle, 2m 4 1/2f 17:30 - National Hunt Chase (Novices' Chase, amateur jockeys), 3m 6f